Updated LRO guidelines (#517)
Microsoft/api-guidelines: azure/Guidelines.md

- Document the POST operation's support for the `Repeatability-First-Sent`, `Repeatability-Request-ID`, and `Repeatability-Result` headers in the API contract and documentation.
- Any operation that does not support repeatability headers should return a 501 (Not Implemented) response for any request that contains valid repeatability request headers.

### Long-Running Operations & Jobs

> A _long-running operation (LRO)_ is typically an operation that should execute synchronously but due to services not wanting to maintain long-lived connections (>1 seconds) and load-balancer timeouts the operation must execute asynchronously. For this pattern, the client initiates the operation on the service and then the client repeatedly polls the service (via another API call) to track the operation's progress/completion.

Reviewer: nit, may better have a few comma in this 2 long sentences.

```suggestion
A _long-running operation (LRO)_ is typically an operation that should execute synchronously, but due to services not wanting to maintain long-lived connections (>1 seconds) and load-balancer timeouts, the operation must execute asynchronously. For this pattern, the client initiates the operation on the service, and then the client repeatedly polls the service (via another API call) to track the operation's progress/completion.
```

<a href="#lro-response-time" name="lro-response-time">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** implement an operation as an LRO if the 99th percentile response time is greater than 1 second and when the client should poll the operation before making more progress.

<a href="#lro-no-patch-lro" name="lro-no-patch-lro">:no_entry:</a> **DO NOT** implement PATCH as an LRO. If LRO update semantics are required, implement it using the [LRO POST action pattern](#lro-existing-resource) .

#### Patterns to Initiate a Long-Running Operation

<a href="#lro-valid-inputs-synchronously" name="lro-valid-inputs-synchronously">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** perform as much validation as practical when initiating an LRO operation to alert clients of errors early.

<a href="#lro-returns-operation-location" name="lro-returns-operation-location">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** include an `operation-location` response header with the absolute URL of the status monitor for the operation.

> <a href="#lro-operation-location-includes-api-version" name="lro-operation-location-includes-api-version">:ballot_box_with_check:</a> **YOU SHOULD** include the `api-version` query parameter in the `operation-location` response header with the same version passed on the initial request but expect a client to change the `api-version` value to whatever a new/different client desires it to be.

Reviewer: We are a bit inconsistent within the guide about the `api-version` in location header.
https://github.com/microsoft/api-guidelines/blob/vNext/azure/ConsiderationsForServiceDesign.md?plain=1#L264-L265 (there we say "without an api-version query parameter")

Reviewer 2: As a User/Client of the API, when/why would you want to change the `api-version` being used for the LRO? I don't see the benefit - surely the API is going to know which LRO API versions support/can properly describe each Resource Type? Whilst I can see the benefit of changing the API version for regular endpoints - I suspect this would cause more problems than it solves?

As such - I'd suggest that this becomes a `MUST` rather than a `SHOULD`:

```suggestion
<a href="#lro-operation-location-includes-api-version" name="lro-operation-location-includes-api-version">:ballot_box_with_check:</a> **YOU MUST** include the `api-version` query parameter in the `operation-location` response header with the same version passed on the initial request but expect a client to change the `api-version` value to whatever a new/different client desires it to be.
```

Author: In a distributed system, it is common for one service using one api-version to initiate an LRO and then to hand the link to another service that may be using a different api-version which expects the over-the-wire schemas to match what it expects. Therefore, the calling client of any single operation must always use the api-version of that client. 

This is usually only an issue for patterns that require 2 or more operations which includes LROs and paging over collections.

Reviewer 3: Thanks for catching that @weidongxu-microsoft. Fixed now.

> <a href="#lro-put-response-headers" name="lro-put-response-headers">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** include response headers with any additional values needed for a [GET polling request](#lro-poll) to the status monitor (e.g. location).

Reviewer: I think this line is moved here without change.

However, it is hard for me to understand the example:
> include response headers with any additional values needed for a GET polling request to the status monitor **(e.g. location)**.

I take the "e.g. location" mean the `location` header. But a `location` header seems not mean much to the GET polling request. (the polling URL should be from `operation-location` header that covered in the sentence above.

Do we have a better example? `retry-after` header is also mentioned in later point. `operation-id` header?
If no good example, maybe skip the example part of the sentence.

Reviewer 3: I agree that the example is poorly explained. The idea is that values passed in headers can be used as parameters -- specifically path parameters -- to the status monitor endpoint. There will always be an `operation-id` -- the final path segment -- but there may be other path parameters and headers can be used to specify what values should be used for these.

I don't know that we should go into all that detail in the guidelines doc, but perhaps we should include this in the ConsiderationsForServiceDesign.

#### Create or replace operation with additional long-running processing
<a href="#put-operation-with-additional-long-running-processing" name="put-operation-with-additional-long-running-processing"></a>

<a href="#lro-create-init" name="lro-create-init">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** use the following pattern when implementing an operation that creates or replaces a resource that involves additional long-running processing:

```text
PUT /UrlToResourceBeingCreated?api-version=<api-version>
operation-id: <optionalStatusMonitorResourceId>

<JSON Resource in body>
```

The response must look like this:

```text

> 200 OK

Reviewer: ```suggestion
201 Created
```

both 200 and 201 is valid, but seems better to make it consistent with the example here for a "create" https://github.com/microsoft/api-guidelines/blob/188ec8130845a640289ec8d4b96491a73aa3af4a/azure/ConsiderationsForServiceDesign.md#create-or-replace-a-resource-requiring-additional-long-running-processing

operation-id: <statusMonitorResourceId>

> operation-location: https://operations/<operation-id>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
operation-location: https://operations/<operation-id>?api-version=<api-version>
```

If we change this, there is a few other cases below.

For an idempotent PUT (same `operation-id` or same request body within some short time window), the service should return the same response as shown above.

For a non-idempotent PUT, the service can choose to overwrite the existing resource (as if the resource were deleted) or the service can return `409-Conflict` with the error's code property indicated why this PUT operation failed.

<a href="#lro-put-operation-id-request-header" name="lro-put-operation-id-request-header">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** allow the client to pass an `Operation-Id` header with a ID for the status monitor for the operation.

If the `Operation-Id` header is not specified, the service may create an operation-id (typically a GUID) and return it via the `operation-id` and `operation-location` response headers; in this case the service must figure out how to deal with retries/idempotency.

<a href="#lro-put-operation-id-default-is-guid" name="lro-put-operation-id-default-is-guid">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** generate an ID (typically a GUID) for the status monitor if the `Operation-Id` header was not passed by the client.

> <a href="#lro-put-operation-id-unique-except-retries" name="lro-put-operation-id-unique-except-retries">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** fail a request with a `400-BadRequest` if the `Operation-Id` header matches an existing operation unless the request is identical to the prior request (a retry scenario).

Author: ```suggestion
<a href="#lro-put-operation-id-unique-except-retries" name="lro-put-operation-id-unique-except-retries">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** fail a request with a `409-Conflict` if the `Operation-Id` header matches an existing operation unless the request is identical to the prior request (a retry scenario).
```

<a href="#lro-put-valid-inputs-synchronously" name="lro-put-valid-inputs-synchronously">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** perform as much validation as practical when initiating the operation to alert clients of errors early.

> <a href="#lro-put-returns-200-or-201" name="lro-put-returns-200-or-201">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** return a `201-Created` status code for create or `200-OK` for replace from the initial request with a representation of the resource if the resource was created successfully.

Reviewer: nit ("replace" in sentence)

```suggestion
<a href="#lro-put-returns-200-or-201" name="lro-put-returns-200-or-201">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** return a `201-Created` status code for create or `200-OK` for replace from the initial request with a representation of the resource, if the resource was created or replaced successfully.
```

<a href="#lro-put-returns-operation-id-header" name="lro-put-returns-operation-id-header">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** include an `Operation-Id` header in the response with the ID of the status monitor for the operation.

<a href="#lro-put-returns-operation-location" name="lro-put-returns-operation-location">:ballot_box_with_check:</a> **YOU SHOULD** include an `Operation-Location` header in the response with the absolute URL of the status monitor for the operation.

> 

Reviewer 4: Thinking about other edge cases such as expired and auto-deleted status monitor case.

> <a href="#lro-put-operation-location-includes-api-version" name="lro-put-operation-location-includes-api-version">:ballot_box_with_check:</a> **YOU SHOULD** include the `api-version` query parameter in the `Operation-Location` header with the same version passed on the initial request if it is required by the get operation on the status monitor.

Author: ```suggestion
<a href="#lro-put-operation-location-includes-api-version" name="lro-put-operation-location-includes-api-version">:ballot_box_with_check:</a> **YOU SHOULD** include the `api-version` query parameter in the `Operation-Location` header with the same version passed on the initial request.
```

Author: All Azure GET operations require an api-version query param

<a href="#lro-delete-operation-id-default-is-guid" name="lro-delete-operation-id-default-is-guid">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** generate an ID (typically a GUID) for the status monitor if the `Operation-Id` header was not passed by the client.

<a href="#lro-delete-returns-202" name="lro-delete-returns-202">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** return a `202-Accepted` status code from the request that initiates an LRO if the processing of the operation was successfully initiated.

<a href="#lro-delete-returns-only-202" name="lro-delete-returns-only-202">:warning:</a> **YOU SHOULD NOT** return any other `2xx` status code from the initial request of an LRO -- return `202-Accepted` and a status monitor even if processing was completed before the initiating request returns.

#### LRO action on a resource pattern
<a href="#post-or-delete-lro-pattern" name="post-or-delete-lro-pattern"></a><!-- Preserve old header link -->

<a href="#lro-existing-resource" name="lro-existing-resource">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** use the following pattern when implementing an LRO action operating on an existing resource:

```text

> POST /UrlToExistingResource:<action>?api-version=<api-version>

Author: ```suggestion
POST /UrlToExistingResource:<action>?api-version=<api-version>&<actionParamsGoHere>
```

operation-id: <optionalStatusMonitorResourceId>`

> <JSON Action parameters in body>

Author: ```suggestion
<JSON Action parameters can go in body if query params don't work>
```

```text
202 Accepted
operation-id: <statusMonitorResourceId>
operation-location: https://operations/<operation-id>

<JSON Status Monitor Resource in body>
```

The request body contains information to be used to execute the action.

For an idempotent POST (same `operation-id` and request body within some short time window), the service should return the same response as the initial request.

For a non-idempotent POST, the service can treat the POST operation as idempotent (if performed within a short time window) or can treat the POST operation as initiating a brand new LRO action operation.

<a href="#lro-no-post-create" name="lro-no-post-create">:no_entry:</a> **DO NOT** use a long-running POST to create a resource -- use PUT as described above.

<a href="#lro-operation-id-request-header" name="lro-operation-id-request-header">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** allow the client to pass an `Operation-Id` header with an ID for the operation's status monitor.

<a href="#lro-operation-id-default-is-guid" name="lro-operation-id-default-is-guid">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** generate an ID (typically a GUID) for the status monitor if the `Operation-Id` header was not passed by the client.

> <a href="#lro-operation-id-unique-except-retries" name="lro-operation-id-unique-except-retries">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** fail a request with a `400-BadRequest` if the `Operation-Id` header matches an existing operation unless the request is identical to the prior request (a retry scenario).

Author: ```suggestion
<a href="#lro-operation-id-unique-except-retries" name="lro-operation-id-unique-except-retries">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** fail a request with a `409-Conflict` if the `Operation-Id` header matches an existing operation unless the request is identical to the prior request (a retry scenario).
```

> <a href="#lro-returns-202" name="lro-returns-202">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** return a `202-Accepted` status code from the request that initiates an LRO if the processing of the operation was successfully initiated (except for "PUT with additional processing" type LRO).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<a href="#lro-returns-202" name="lro-returns-202">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** return a `202-Accepted` status code from the request that initiates an LRO if the processing of the operation was successfully initiated.
```

we seems don't need the "except" part here, as it in section of "LRO action on a resource pattern"

> <a href="#lro-returns-202" name="lro-returns-202">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** return a `202-Accepted` status code from the request that initiates an LRO if the processing of the operation was successfully initiated (except for "PUT with additional processing" type LRO).

Reviewer 3: Minor revision of @weidongxu-microsoft 's suggestion.
```suggestion
<a href="#lro-returns-202" name="lro-returns-202">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** return a `202-Accepted` status code from the request that initiates an LRO action on a resource if the processing of the operation was successfully initiated.
```

<a href="#lro-returns-only-202" name="lro-returns-only-202">:warning:</a> **YOU SHOULD NOT** return any other `2xx` status code from the initial request of an LRO -- return `202-Accepted` and a status monitor even if processing was completed before the initiating request returns.

<a href="#lro-returns-status-monitor" name="lro-returns-status-monitor">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** return a status monitor in the response body as described in [Obtaining status and results of long-running operations](#obtaining-status-and-results-of-long-running-operations).

> #### LRO action with no related resource pattern

Reviewer: Not related to the guideline.

We may want to add a new operation template to Azure.Core typespec.
At current Azure.Core, dev would tend to use `LongRunningResourceCreateOrReplace` template, which is not a fit for this "no related resource pattern".

Reviewer 3: Requested review from TypeSpec team members.

Reviewer: Opened an issue to typespec-azure-core to see if we are going to add a template https://github.com/Azure/typespec-azure/issues/787

<a href="#lro-action-no-resource" name="lro-action-no-resource">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** use the following pattern when implementing an LRO action not related to a specific resource (such as a batch operation):

```text

> PUT <operation-endpoint>/<operation-id>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PUT <operation-endpoint>/<operation-id>?api-version=<api-version>
```

If we follow URL patterns of other sections.

Not sure if we would include `?<actionParamsGoHere>`. Would some action parameters go to request body, and some go to query parameter?

All patterns that initiate a LRO either implicitly or explicitly create a [Status Monitor resource](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7231#section-6.3.3) in the service's `operations` collection.

<a href="#lro-status-monitor-structure" name="lro-status-monitor-structure">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** return a status monitor in the response body that conforms with the following structure:

Property | Type        | Required | Description
-------- | ----------- | :------: | -----------
`id`     | string      | true     | The unique id of the operation
`kind`   | string enum | true(*)  | The kind of operation
`status` | string enum | true     | The operation's current status: "NotStarted", "Running", "Succeeded", "Failed", and "Canceled"
`error`  | ErrorDetail |          | If `status`=="Failed", contains reason for failure
`result` | object      |          | If `status`=="Succeeded" && Action LRO (POST or PUT), contains success result if needed
additional<br/>properties | | | Additional named or dynamic properties of the operation

(*): When a status monitor endpoint supports multiple operations with different result structures or additional properties,

> the status monitor **must** be polymorphic -- it **must** contain a `kind` property that indicates the kind of long-running operation.

Reviewer: A question: do we require the `kind` property, if the status monitor is only for a single type (resource or action)?

Reviewer 3: No we don't. Is there a better wording here that would make this clearer?

Reviewer: Thanks for the clarification.

Maybe just add a few words e.g. `(*) The kind property is required when a status monitor endpoint ...`

#### Obtaining status and results of long-running operations

<a href="#lro-poll" name="lro-poll">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** use the following pattern to allow clients to poll the current state of a Status Monitor resource:

```text

> GET /operations/<operation-id>?api-version=<api-version>

Reviewer: nit, may better to make URL consistent with the PUT, to make it clear they are the same URL (just different HTTP method)

```suggestion
GET <operation-endpoint>/<operation-id>?api-version=<api-version>
```

<a href="#lro-status-monitor-no-resource-result" name="lro-status-monitor-no-resource-result">:no_entry:</a> **DO NOT** include a `result` property in the status monitor for a long-running operation that is not an action-type long-running operation.

<a href="#lro-status-monitor-retry-after" name="lro-status-monitor-retry-after">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** include a `retry-after` header in the response if the operation is not complete. The value of this header should be an integer number of seconds that the client should wait before polling the status monitor again.

<a href="#lro-status-monitor-retention" name="lro-status-monitor-retention">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** retain the status monitor resource for some publicly documented period of time (at least 24 hours) after the operation completes.

#### Pattern to List Status Monitors

Use the following patterns to allow clients to list Status Monitor resources.

> <a href="#lro-list-status-monitors" name="lro-list-status-monitors">:heavy_check_mark:</a>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<a href="#lro-list-status-monitors" name="lro-list-status-monitors">:ballot_box_with_check:</a>
```

**YOU MAY** support a GET method on any status monitor collection URL that returns a list of the status monitors in that collection.

<a href="#lro-put-action-list-status-monitors" name="lro-put-action-list-status-monitors">:ballot_box_with_check:</a>
**YOU SHOULD** support a list operation for any status monitor collection that includes status monitors for LRO Actions with no related resource.

<a href="#lro-list-status-monitors-filter" name="lro-list-status-monitors-filter">:ballot_box_with_check:</a>
**YOU SHOULD** support the `filter` query parameter on the list operation for any polymorphic status monitor collection and support filtering on the `kind` value of the status monitor.

For example, the following request should return all status monitor resources whose `kind` is either "VMInitializing" *or* "VMRebooting"
and whose status is "NotStarted" *or* "Succeeded".

```text

> GET /operations?filter=kind eq 'VMInitializing' or kind eq 'VMRebooting'&filter=status eq 'NotStarted' or status eq 'Succeeded'

Author: ```suggestion
GET /operations?filter=(kind eq 'VMInitializing' or kind eq 'VMRebooting') and (status eq 'NotStarted' or status eq 'Succeeded')
```

Author: There should never be 2+ filter query parameters in a single URL

- Any operation that does not support repeatability headers should return a 501 (Not Implemented) response for any request that contains valid repeatability request headers.

<a href="#lro" name="lro"></a>

> ### Long-Running Operations (LROs)

Reviewer 5: This breaks existing links - even within the same doc e.g., the HTTP Return Codes section refers to this as <https://github.com/microsoft/api-guidelines/blob/vNext/azure/Guidelines.md#long-running-operations--jobs>. Also, if anyone right-clicked and copied the link, that same generated name is used and not the one we added as "lro" above it. Commonmark doesn't care about those - they are for external references only, but you have to know not to copy the link from the rendered markdown.

Reviewer 3: Okay ... I'll revert to the prior header and just delete the anchor if it's not relevant.

> A _long-running operation (LRO)_ is typically an operation that should execute synchronously but due to services not wanting to maintain long-lived connections (>1 seconds) and load-balancer timeouts the operation must execute asynchronously. For this pattern, the client initiates the operation on the service and then the client repeatedly polls the service (via another API call) to track the operation's progress/completion. 

Reviewer 5: > is typically an operation that should execute synchronously

A lot of the LROs we've reviewed don't fall into this, and it seems the norm - especially for very LROs like cert signing, AI tagging, etc. - is quickly growing to truly LROs. I think this assertion is misleading and could make people doubt whether they should be using an LRO or not. The original text seemed fine.

> LROs are always started by 1 logical client and may be be polled (have their status checked) by the same client, another client, or even multiple clients/browsers. An example would be a dashboard or portal that shows all the operations along with their status.  See the [Long Running Operations section](./ConsiderationsForServiceDesign.md#long-running-operations) in Considerations for Service Design for an introduction to the design of long-running operations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
LROs are always started by 1 logical client and may be polled (have their status checked) by the same client, another client, or even multiple clients/browsers. An example would be a dashboard or portal that shows all the operations along with their status.  See the [Long Running Operations section](./ConsiderationsForServiceDesign.md#long-running-operations) in Considerations for Service Design for an introduction to the design of long-running operations.
```

<a href="#lro-response-time" name="lro-response-time">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** implement an operation as an LRO if the 99th percentile response time is greater than 1 second and when the client should poll the operation before making more progress.

<a href="#lro-no-patch-lro" name="lro-no-patch-lro">:no_entry:</a> **DO NOT** implement PATCH as an LRO. If LRO update semantics are required, implement it using the [LRO POST action pattern](#lro-existing-resource) .

> ## Patterns to Initiate a Long-Running Operation

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Patterns to Initiate a Long-Running Operation
```

The second pattern applies only in the case of a PUT operation to create a resource that also involves additional long-running processing.
For guidance on when to use a specific pattern, please refer to [Considerations for Service Design, Long Running Operations](./ConsiderationsForServiceDesign.md#long-running-operations).
These are described in the following two sections.
## Patterns to Initiate a Long-Running Operation

#### POST or DELETE LRO pattern
<a href="#lro-valid-inputs-synchronously" name="lro-valid-inputs-synchronously">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** perform as much validation as practical when initiating an LRO operation to alert clients of errors early.

A POST or DELETE long-running operation accepts a request from the client to initiate the operation processing and returns
a [status monitor](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7231#section-6.3.3) that reports the operation's progress.
<a href="#lro-returns-operation-location" name="lro-returns-operation-location">:ballot_box_with_check:</a> **YOU SHOULD** include an `operation-location` response header with the absolute URL of the status monitor for the operation.

> <a href="#lro-no-post-create" name="lro-no-post-create">:no_entry:</a> **DO NOT** use a long-running POST to create a resource -- use PUT as described below.

Reviewer 5: This diff is looking much larger than I expected. I expect that several sections / directives remained as others were inserted, but enough change to the text makes everything misaligned. So were any directives dropped like this `lro-no-post-create`? We certainly want to be flexible for guidelines, but we may want to try to keep existing bookmarks even if just the `<a name>` on directives that closely align. For example, if this one is gone, we could add the bookmark to `lro-create-init`.

Reviewer 3: All fixed (I hope).

> <JSON Resource in body>

Reviewer 5: If we're going to use HTTP header semantics, nit here and elsewhere:

```suggestion

<JSON Resource in body>
```

(empty line before body)

```

- PUT creates the resource immediately and returns but the initialization of the resource can take time to complete.

- The request & response body schemas must be identical & represent the resource.

>   - The resource schema must contain an `initializationStatus` property indicating whether the initialization is `Running`, `Failed`, `Succeeded`, etc.

Reviewer 5: I'm not crazy about "etc". We document the supported / recommended values. Either list them here, or link to them (I believe they are above).

Reviewer: I assume this is the same PUT to create a resource (as we support today).

On the `initializationStatus` property: so we got another "required" property that would only exist in future LRO, but not in existing LRO?

Trying to see if we can avoid the nuance of "legacy LRO", "LRO without initializationStatus", "LRO with initializationStatus and kind"...

200 OK
operation-id: <statusMonitorResourceId>
operation-location: https://operations/<operation-id>
retry-after: <delay-seconds>    (if status not terminal)
<JSON Resource in body>
```

- PUT creates the resource immediately and returns but the initialization of the resource can take time to complete.

- The request & response body schemas must be identical & represent the resource.

<a href="#lro-valid-inputs-synchronously" name="lro-valid-inputs-synchronously">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** perform as much validation as practical when initiating the operation to alert clients of errors early.
  - The resource schema must contain an `initializationStatus` property indicating whether the initialization is `Running`, `Failed`, `Succeeded`, etc.

<a href="#lro-returns-202" name="lro-returns-202">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** return a `202-Accepted` status code from the request that initiates an LRO if the processing of the operation was successfully initiated (except for "PUT with additional processing" type LRO).
- This operation implicitly creates a status monitor resource and sets its `kind` property to something like `<ResourceType>Initializing`; for example `VMInitializing`.

> <a href="#lro-returns-only-202" name="lro-returns-only-202">:warning:</a> **YOU SHOULD NOT** return any other `2xx` status code from the initial request of an LRO -- return `202-Accepted` and a status monitor even if processing was completed before the initiating request returns.

Reviewer 5: 1. I don't think we should get rid of bookmarks where there are still bullet points below they could apply to. This is a contract and, as such, we should try to maintain references as much as makes sense.
2. I don't see anything in the new text about returning only 202.

Reviewer 3: I think I have fixed all these.

> - Do not return a response body.

Reviewer: Does the resource disappear right now (after the DELETE), or it still there and only disappear after LRO success? If latter, how's it `initializationStatus` (or other state) if queried via GET?

- The response body must be the implicily created status monitor resource.

- The `operation-id` header allows the client to specify the status monitor's resource ID and is also used for retries/idempotency. If unspecified, the service may create an operation-id (typically a GUID) and return it via the `operation-id` and `operation-location` response headers; in this case, the service must figure out how to deal with retries/idempotency.

  - For an idempotent POST (same `operation-id` or same request body within some short time window), the service should return the same response as shown above.

  - For a non-idempotent POST, the service can treat the POST operation as idempotent (if performed within a short time window) or can treat the POST operation as initiating a brand new LRO action operation.

<a href="#lro-action-no-resource" name="lro-action-no-resource">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** use the following pattern when implementing an LRO action not related to a specific resource (such as a batch operation):<p>
```
PUT /operations/<operation-id>
<JSON Status Monitor Resource in body; `kind` MUST be set>

> ```

Reviewer: This seems to be the VLRO we discussed (on whether it takes long time or not). But here we are framing it on whether it is about a resource or not?

Reviewer 3: Yes, we've shifted focus a bit. These guidelines should work for many of the VLROs we have wrestled with recently, and they are easier to explain.

The response must look like this:<p>
```
200 OK
retry-after: <delay-seconds>    (if status not terminal)
<JSON Status Monitor Resource in body>
```

- This operation *explicitly* creates a status monitor resource as passed in the request body.

>   - The request's `kind` property must be set by the client to some value pre-defined by the service; for example `batchDocumentTranslate`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- The request's `kind` property must be set by the client to some value pre-defined by the service; for example `batchDocumentTranslate`.
```

- The response body is the status monitor resource whose schema must be idential to the request's body.

- The `operation-id` URL segment (not header) is *mandatory* forcing the client to specify the status monitor's resource ID and is also used for retries/idempotency. 

> ## The Status Monitor Resource

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### The Status Monitor Resource
```

All patterns that initiate a LRO either implicitly or explicitly create a [Status Monitor resource](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7231#section-6.3.3) in the service's `operations` collection. A Status Monitor resource must look like this:

Property | Type        | Required | Description
-------- | ----------- | :------: | -----------
`id`     | string      | true     | The unique id of the operation
`kind`   | string enum | true     | The kind of operation
`status` | string enum | true     | The operation's current status: "NotStarted", "Running", "Succeeded", "Failed", and "Canceled"
`error`  | ErrorDetail |          | If `status`=="Failed", contains reason for failure

> `result` | object      |          | if Action LRO (POST or PUT) && `status`=="Succeeded", contains success result

Reviewer: One question: does `result` be required, if `status` is `Succeeded`? Or it can be omitted (if `Succeeded` already sufficient information).

additional<br/>properties | | | Additional named or dynamic properties of the operation

> - Because services can support different kinds of operations, status monitor resources in this collection *must be* polymorphic; the `kind` property indicates the kind of long-running operation.

Reviewer 5: A single bullet below the table? Seems odd. I have a more general comment about all these bullets in my closing remark for the PR, though...

> ## Pattern to Poll a Long-Running Operation's Status

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Pattern to Poll a Long-Running Operation's Status
```

<a href="#lro-poll" name="lro-poll">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** use the following pattern to allow clients to poll the current state of a Status Monitor resource:<p>
```
GET /operations/<operation-id>
```

The response must look like this:<p>
```
200 OK
retry-after: <delay-seconds>    (if status not terminal)
<JSON Status Monitor Resource in body>
```

<a href="#lro-poll-accepts-any-api-version" name="lro-poll-accepts-any-api-version">:ballot_box_with_check:</a> **YOU SHOULD** allow any valid value of the `api-version` query parameter to be used in the GET operation on the status monitor.

>   - Note: Clients may replace the value of `api-version` in the `operation-location` URL with a value appropriate for their application. Remember that the client initiating the LRO may not be the same client polling the LRO's status.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
> Note: Clients may replace the value of `api-version` in the `operation-location` URL with a value appropriate for their application. Remember that the client initiating the LRO may not be the same client polling the LRO's status.
```

<a href="#lro-status-monitor-retention" name="lro-status-monitor-retention">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** retain the status monitor resource for some publicly documented period of time (at least 24 hours) after the operation completes.

> ## Pattern to List Status Monitors (optional)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Pattern to List Status Monitors (optional)
```

<a href="#lro-list" name="lro-list">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO** use the following pattern to allow clients to list Status Monitor resources:<p>
```
GET /operations?kind=VMInitializing,VMRebooting&status=NotStarted,Succeeded
```

The response must look like this:<p>
```200 OK
{
    "value": [
       { "id": "12345", "kind": "VMInitializing", "status": "Running", … },
       { … },
       { … },
       { "id": "abcde", "kind": "VMRebooting", "status": "Failed", … }
    ],
    "nextLink": "{opaqueUrl}"
}
```
 - The values for the `kind` and `status` query parameters are logically OR'd together. 
 

>    - The above example returns all status monitor resources whose `kind` is either "VMInitializing" *or* "VMRebooting" and whose status is "NotStarted" *or* "Succeeded".

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- The above example returns all status monitor resources whose `kind` is either "VMInitializing" *or* "VMRebooting" and whose status is "NotStarted" *or* "Succeeded".
```

Please check all bullets. I've seen a number misaligned and it does matter. If you're using VSCode, you can click the Preview button. I also recommend installing the Microsoft Learn Pack that includes markdownlint et. al. It's what's required for docs on learn.microsoft.com (validation will run the same rules so it's best to install it).

Reviewer 3: I am using markdown lint, but I'll double-check the rendered version after pushing this round of fixes.

Property | Type        | Required | Description
-------- | ----------- | :------: | -----------
`id`     | string      | true     | The unique id of the operation
`kind`   | string enum | true(*)  | The kind of operation
`status` | string enum | true     | The operation's current status: "NotStarted", "Running", "Succeeded", "Failed", and "Canceled"
`error`  | ErrorDetail |          | If `status`=="Failed", contains reason for failure
`result` | object      |          | If `status`=="Succeeded" && Action LRO (POST or PUT), contains success result if needed
additional<br/>properties | | | Additional named or dynamic properties of the operation

(*): When a status monitor endpoint supports multiple operations with different result structures or additional properties,

> the status monitor *must be* polymorphic -- it **must** contain a `kind` property that indicates the kind of long-running operation.

Reviewer 5: Nit: Why italic (one asterisk) in one place and bold (two asterisks) in another?

<a href="#lro-list-status-monitors-filter" name="lro-list-status-monitors-filter">:ballot_box_with_check:</a>
**YOU SHOULD** support the `filter` query parameter on the list operation for any polymorphic status monitor collection and support filtering on the `kind` value of the status monitor.

> For example, the following request should returns all status monitor resources whose `kind` is either "VMInitializing" *or* "VMRebooting"

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For example, the following request should return all status monitor resources whose `kind` is either "VMInitializing" *or* "VMRebooting"
```

<a href="#condreq-etag-depends-on-encoding" name="condreq-etag-depends-on-encoding">:white_check_mark:</a> **DO**, when supporting multiple representations (e.g. Content-Encodings) for the same resource, generate different ETag values for the different representations.

> <a href="#substrings" name="substrings"></a>

Reviewer 5: FWIW, for headers this is pointless. It's not what commonmark will use during rendering, which is what GitHub et. al. use.

Some Azure services return substring offet & length values within a string. For example, the offset & length within a string to a name, email address, or phone #. 
When a service response includes a string, the client's programming language deserializes that string into that language's internal string encoding. Below are the possible encodings and examples of languages that use each encoding:

| Encoding    | Example languages |
| -------- | ------- |
| UTF-8 | Go, Rust, Ruby, PHP |
| UTF-16 | JavaScript, Java, C# |
| CodePoint (UTF-32) | Python |

Because the service doesn't know what language a client is written in and what string encoding that language uses, the service can't return UTF-agnostic offset and length values that the client can use to index within the string. To address this, the service response must include offset & length values for all 3 possible encodings and then the client code must select the encoding it required by its language's internal string encoding.

For example, if a service response needed to identify offset & length values for "name" and "email" substrings, the JSON response would look like this:

> ```

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
```json
```

Will properly syntax highlight it.

Reviewer 5: ...though, I'd then elide line 1201 below since it won't be valid and their `json` highlighter doesn't like comments. You might see if `jsonc` works.

{
  (... other properties not shown...)

>   "fullString": "(...some string containing a name and an email address...)",

Reviewer 5: Should we actually include a working example with emoji or international characters so people perhaps get a better sense of when simple indexes or lengths fail?

  "name": {
    "offset": {
      "utf8": 12,
      "utf16": 10,
      "codePoint":  4
    },
    "length": {
      "uft8": 10,
      "utf16": 8,
      "codePoint":  2
    }
  },
  "email": {
    "offset": {
      "utf8": 12,
      "utf16": 10,
      "codePoint":  4
    },
    "length": {
      "uft8": 10,
      "utf16": 8,
      "codePoint":  4
    }
  }
}
```

Then, the Go developer, for example, would get the substring containing the name using code like this:

> ```
>    var response := client.SomeMethodReturningJSONShownAbove(...)
>    name := response.fullString[ response.name.offset.utf8 : response.name.offset.utf8 + response.name.length.utf8]
> ```

Reviewer 5: Might as well show proper syntax highlighting (and code):
````suggestion
```go
   response := client.SomeMethodReturningJSONShownAbove("...")
   name := response.fullString[ response.name.offset.utf8 : response.name.offset.utf8 + response.name.length.utf8]
```
````

> The service must calculate the offset & length for all 3 encodings and return them because clients find it difficult working with Unicode encodings and how to convert from one encoding to another. In other words, we do this to simplify client development and ensure customer success when isolating a substring.

Reviewer 5: I realize we've already discussed this, but I find this statement contradictory. It is a hard problem, but why is them passing the encoding any different than them knowing which encoding to use coming back in the response?

I still think this is something that our 1P clients - generated or otherwise - should handle for them. It could still be the same response - I know that helps solve problems of calling into one service that calls another service - but we can still make it easy by helping select - or just do it for them - the right encoding for the language SDK being used.
